Speaker 1

Today, 9:49 AM
Thank you for joining us today to learn about WHEMIS, which stands for Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System. This may not be the most popular training session to sit through, it is an important one. As is intended to ensure all Canadian workers are able to recognize and protect themselves from any chemical hazards that are found within the workplace, as well as where to locate the information needed in the event of a product misuse. In addition, women's training is required by law.
This module should take you approximately forty three minutes to watch the video. You will need to complete the short quiz to check for understanding afterwards, and we'll provide you all of the following key information. What whimys is and why it's important, recent changes that have been made to whimys legislation, the need for worker education and training, the different responsibilities of various workplace parties such as the employer and the employee and as well as the suppliers who provide hazardous products, the different class and categories of hazardous products, rules for the labeling of hazardous products, and role of safety data sheets, SDS. This training will provide a general overview of WHEMIS, and how to recognize and handle chemicals safely, However, it doesn't provide the safety instructions or procedures that are specific to your particular workplace or job site. Please note that there are specific chemical hazards or safety policies and procedures that are specific to to your organization that you will require further training on. Example, you may be required to wear personal protective equipment, PPE, or utilize other safety measures to deal with the chemicals you work with. Are concerned about your ability to handle a chemical or hazard safely or have to utilize any of the protective measures available to you, be sure to contact the appropriate party at your workplace for clarification. Your health and safety is important.
As we all know, chemicals are indeed hazardous and can cause a variety of temporary or chronic health effects. Even life threatening injuries and illnesses such as poisoning, rashes or burns, eye damage, nerve damage, headaches, issues with various organs of the body such as the lungs, liver, or kidneys, cancer, and even death. Of course, when they are used under the wrong conditions, can also create dangerous circumstances such as fires and explosions, they can do harm to materials you work with or the environment.
Over the years, a numerous workers in Canada have sustained or succumb to terrible and preventable accidents and injuries as a result of dangerous and toxic chemicals. Fortunately, in Canada and many other countries, laws continue to evolve to protect workers' safety and rights. To place the onus on suppliers and employers to ensure employees know how to protect themselves from dangers. Including those from hazardous chemicals. WHIMS is one of those laws.
Formal WHIMS legislation came a protect the rights of all Canadian workers by ensuring they are properly informed about the hazardous materials and chemicals within their workplace. In a nutshell, WIMS created one formal system all suppliers and employers were required use to identify and recognize hazardous or toxic products, complete with easily recognizable hazard symbols, a consistent way to provide key information about each hazardous product. Such as how to handle and store each product. This way, there could be no confusion about what products contained and no for missing information on products or their descriptions. In 02/2015, Canada updated WHEMIS so that it was consistent with the international community system in terms of the classification, symbols, labels, and safety data sheets for hazardous products to ensure even greater protection for Canadian employees in a global economy. WHEMIS is being continually updated, and the latest set of changes took place in December 2022. So hazardous products regulations.
Within Canada, WHMIS is legislated at both the federal and provincial or territorial levels. Laws at the federal level require product suppliers to classify dangerous products according to the WHMIS classification system and provide appropriate information about how to properly handle and store these products. Provincial and territorial legislation then requires employers to obtain and disseminate the information about these hazardous products to their workers to keep them safe.
WHEMIS is enforced by the health and safety agencies within each province and territory. Health and safety inspectors are in charge of making sure businesses are complying with the laws, and violations of whamis can be met with fines of up to $100,000 and up to two years in prison.
Canada introduced significant amendments to its whim miss legislation now referred to as WHMISS 2022. These amendments included the adoption of new hazard classes and categories, modifications to classification criteria for certain hazard classes, and new requirements for safety data sheets and labels. These changes came into force on 12/15/2022, but the government will allow for a three year transition period which will end on 12/14/2025. During this period, regulated parties can comply with either the former or the amended hazardous products regulations, HPR, but not both. After 12/14/2025, only WIMIS 2022 will be allowed. You haven't taken a WHMIS course recently, notice some new symbols and terminology. Please pay close attention to ensure you are able to recognize the new information needed to keep you safe at work.
So who needs WIMS training? The answer is most Canadian workers need general WHMIS training at minimum. WIMS training by law must be provided to anyone who may come in contact with one or more hazardous products within the workplace. Since most Canadian workplaces contain some hazardous products, general WIMS training like this course should be provided to everyone. Again, more specific training may be required in addition to this training. Depending on the type of work being done.
Speaker 2

Today, 9:54 AM
It's easy to understand why people working in direct contact with chemicals such as in manufacturing plants hospitals, laboratories, agriculture, or construction sites would need to be up to speed with hazardous chemicals, But what about office workers? While office spaces may seem less dangerous, are in fact numerous chemical hazards within office settings that can lead to physical or health concerns such as toner for photocopiers, cleaning products like bleach, toilet cleaners, and disinfectants. Paint, glues, flammable aerosols, and more.
Speaker 1

Today, 9:54 AM
It's important to note that WHEMIS only applies to hazardous chemicals and materials that have been identified within the hazardous products act and that fit within the various hazard categories set out in this act. Some products or toxins that exist in the workplace that aren't covered by whammies such as cigarette smoke, certain explosives, or pest control products. It's not that these products aren't dangerous. It's just that they're covered in different pieces of legislation, many of which require their own training or safety measures.
Now that you understand what WHEMIS is, the legislation surrounding it it's for, and why it's important, quickly go over the key elements of whimis as well as the various key players that have responsibilities to fulfill under the law.
Within WHMIS, there are a few key elements that work together to inform employees about the chemical hazards they may be working with. These are product hazard classes or categories, labels, safety data sheets, and education and training.
Are also key parties that have roles to play within WIMUS in order to keep employees safe. These are the suppliers, manufacturers, or importers, the employers, and the employees themselves. Let's begin by examining the responsibilities of each key party. As mandated by the law.
First and foremost, suppliers and manufacturers hazardous products are responsible for making sure customers know who supply the products, the type of hazard contained in the product, the protection measures to take when it comes to using or storing the product. To do this, they must examine the ingredients of each product and classify it according to the appropriate women's classification category outlined in the Hazardous Products Act. Label the product or container correctly and provide a safety data sheet SDS to go with it. We'll get into the specific VIMUS categories labels and SDS shortly, Employers are then required by law to do their part by being aware of the hazardous products in the workplace, how they are used, and where they are located or stored, keeping accurate record about the hazardous products in the workplace, making sure the containers of hazardous products found in the workplace are correctly identified and labeled, using the latest standards. Ensuring up to date safety data sheets, SDSs, are available for workers to find and read. Employers must then develop internal procedure for the safe use handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous products, how to protect workers, such as utilize personal protect equipment or create specific safety plans where necessary, and what to do in an emergency? And they must provide education and training to all employees who may come into contact with a hazardous product, win this legislation, how to read labels and safety data sheets, how different types of hazardous products could affect them negatively.
Employees also have responsibilities under WHEMIS. Specifically, employees must complete WHMIS training and any other education as assigned by the employer. Follow the instructions and safe work procedures as outlined to protect themselves and others, Be familiar with the hazardous products they may come in contact with. Only use products that have a label and that they've received training on. Understand SDS information and know where SDS sheets are located. Ask for help if needed, and report any concerns to the appropriate member of staff immediately, for example, supervisor. Manager, health and safety representative, committee member, or human resources.
Now let's move on to the more practical components of this course, and learn about the hazard groups, classes, and categories of WHEMIS. As well as the symbols or pictograms that go along with them.
WHEMIS products have been divided into two different hazard groups, physical hazards, health hazards. The physical hazards tell us the properties of the chemical and what they might do, such as set on fire or explode, the health hazards tell us the effects the chemical could have on our health. Another global hazard category to be aware of is that of environmental hazards. While WEMIS doesn't specifically incorporate environmental hazards, it's still helpful to know how to recognize them. So we'll discuss them briefly later in the training.
All women's products have been further sorted into key product classes that help inform us of the properties of the chemicals we are working with as well as the adverse effects they can cause on us, or our surroundings. The categories have been spelled out in full within the federal government's hazardous products act, and the Hazardous Products Regulations. For example, WHIMS tells that items in the physical hazard group that have been further categorized in the hazard class Flammable gases, aerosols, flammable liquids, and flammable solids are products that ignite meaning they can catch fire or explode. One of the hazard classes in the health hazard group is carcinogenicity. Any products that may lead to cancer will be labeled within this hazard class. Within each class of products, there are also categories associated with each hazard. These categories are depicted by numbers with number one indicating the greatest amount of hazard in a specific class, and number for indicating the smallest amount of hazard for a product in its class. Are also subcategories indicated with a b c and d. Once again, category one is the most dangerous. Category one a, one b, one c, and one d are still more dangerous than anything in category two and so on.
When taken together, this information about to recognize. The type of hazard they are dealing with, the type of adverse effect it might have, and and degree of danger present. In turn, the product user can utilize this information to store or handle the hazard as chemical efficiently and make use of protective gear or measures as needed.
Before we move on to our section on WHIMS symbols, we need to draw your attention to the recent physical hazard class and category updates made within WHIMIS 2022. These changes reflect an evolving understanding of workplace hazards and ensure more comprehensive safety protocols. First, a new physical hazard class called chemicals under pressure has been added. Second, a new hazard class title has been changed to aerosols and within it, A category for nonflammable aerosols and a new subcategory for flammable gases have been added. Finally, the overall category formerly called pyrofluoric gases that was part of WHEMIS 02/2015 has now been removed to simplify the classification. Instead, pyrofluoric gases and chemically unstable gases have been moved under the class of flammable gases. What does this mean? Means that if you work with chemicals under pressure, aerosols, or flammable gases and specifically pyrophoric gases, Please take notice here and ensure you understand changes to any descriptions, symbols, or safety data sheet information that may apply in your workplace. That you know how to recognize these hazards and how to protect yourself when you are in their presence. In order to streamline the ability to recognize the dangers present within chemical products, WHIMS hazard classes are represented by pictogram, or images. These pictograms help the user of the product to
Speaker 3

Today, 10:00 AM
quickly and easily identify
Speaker 1

Today, 10:00 AM
easily determine which type of hazard they are dealing with. Picograms are easily visible due to their red border and the representative symbol inside which indicates the hazard. You will find pictograms on the product supplier labels of the hazardous products you are in contact with. Pictograms may also be located on the safety data sheet for the product. If the pictogram itself isn't on the SDS, words that clearly describe the hazard must be.
Let's go over the pictograms together. Again, pictograms are symbols designed for the quick and easy recognition of the types of hazards present. It's crucial to familiarize yourself with pictograms to ensure safety when handling hazardous materials. There are five categories of physical hazard pictograms within WHEMIS. These are depicted by the following pictograms. The flame. The flame over a circle. The gas cylinder, corrosion, and an exploding bomb. So let's go over these one by one.
The flame pictogram indicates flammable materials or fire hazards. Products in this category may burst into flame quickly if they are heated or if they come in contact with a spark
Speaker 3

Today, 10:01 AM
or static.
Speaker 1

Today, 10:01 AM
They might also emit flammable gases when combined with other substances such as water or air. Not only might these products catch fire quickly, they burn vigorously. You may be familiar with in this category are gasoline and propane. However, they come in many forms or classes such as flammable gases, aerosols, oxidizing liquids, oxidizing solids, self reactive substances and mixtures, and more.
The flame over the circle pictogram indicates oxidizing materials or oxidizing hazards. Oxidizing materials give off oxygen or other gases, which can cause materials to burn, explode, or spontaneously combust. They can also increase the speed or intensity of a fire. Examples of oxidizing materials are sodium nitrate and chlorates.
The gas cylinder pictogram indicates that gas are under pressure. These gases can be liquefied. Non liquefied, or dissolved. Gas under pressure can explode if it's heated or otherwise exposed to high temperature. Such as when placed in direct sunlight. In addition, refrigerated gases are extremely cold and can cause severe cold burns.
Corrosive materials are represented by the following pictogram. Corrosive materials are strong acids or bases that can attack and destroy metal. Eat through containers, ferns can and seriously damage or irritate
Speaker 3

Today, 10:02 AM
eyes. What's
Speaker 1

Today, 10:02 AM
worse, damage caused by corrosive agents can be permanent, so pay attention when you see this symbol.
The exploding bomb pictogram is fairly self explanatory. It is used to indicate materials that are explosive or highly reactive. Products can explode if they are stored and handled incorrectly. For example, it can be dangerous to drop or bump or heat these products or combine them with other substances like water. Products with the exploding bomb picogram are highly dangerous and should be avoided if possible. Let's move on to the picograms used to notify users about various health hazards.
There are four categories of health hazard pictograms within WHEMIS. These are indicated by the skull and crossbones, the health hazard pictogram, the exclamation mark, and the biohazardous and infectious materials
Speaker 3

Today, 10:02 AM
pictogram.
The
Speaker 1

Today, 10:02 AM
skull and crossbones is another symbol many of you are familiar with already. Is used to indicate toxic materials or poison. Products with this symbol can be toxic through various channels such as consuming them, breathing them, or touching them. The level of toxicity varies as well, so be sure to not only view the pictogram itself, but gain information from the category level, represented on the label or safety data sheet. This is important as toxic materials can lead to lead to death, acute or long term respiratory issues, These products may cause damage after a single exposure or after repeated exposure.
The pictogram with a human torso with issues in the chest region is used to indicate products that are suspected of causing a variety of serious health hazards. This is a very dangerous symbol as it lets the user know that the contents of the product may cause. Skin or respiratory issues, organ toxicity, reproductive or genetic issues, cancer, problems with specific organs or aspiration, and many others. You are working with a product with a health hazard symbol, make sure you are fully educated on it and take all precautions.
The pictogram with the exclamation mark symbolizes products that cause less serious health effects than those classified as health hazards. The most common issues these substances cause are skin, lung, or eye irritation, and allergic reactions. However, it is important to realize that some products within this class classification can be toxic if eaten or inhaled. Repeated exposure may increase the intensity of the reaction as well.
The pictogram below is used to indicate biohazardous or infectious materials. This means is that the materials contained within include organisms or toxins that can cause disease in people or animals, such as bacteria and viruses. This is because they can live in human tissue and fluids. Products with this label are toxic and should be avoided without the proper personal protective gear and training.
Is one final pictogram you may come across that you should be aware of, It is the environment and aquatic hazard pictogram, and it contains an image of a death fish and a dead tree. As was mentioned earlier, this particular hazard symbol was not adopted with WHEMIS, however. It is used by several other countries. Therefore, it may appear on product labels in SDS you are in contact with. For that reason, important to know that products with this label are dangerous to the environment including living things and ecosystems, within or outside of the aquatic environment.
We've now covered off all the nine pictograms that are part of WHIMISM and one that is used in the global community. Please take time to commit these symbols and their meaning to your memory. It could save your life and or prevent injury, illness, or material damage. Do all hazard categories have pictograms? Before we move on from pictograms, important to mention that not all hazard classes require a pictogram. This occurs when the hazard is product in question doesn't meet the criteria to be placed in a particular hazard class or hazard category. If a pictogram isn't present, this doesn't mean the product isn't dangerous. It just means the particular hazardous components fit within any of the agreed upon categories of whimbus. This case, you will still be notified of the hazards through labels. Safety data sheet, and other elements such as a signal word, rather than via pictogram.
So what are signal words, labels, and safety data sheets? Let's explore that now.
Mentioned earlier in our training, all chemical manufacturers, importers, or distributors need to make sure every container hazardous chemicals is labeled with specific information. Employers are then tasked with making sure hazardous products coming into the workplace are identified and properly labeled according to WHEMIS before they are stored, handled, or used within the workplace. This means each product that falls within one of the main hazard classes of WHEMIS is have a label and a safety data sheet associated with it. The purpose of these labels and safety data sheets is to provide additional main hazards within the product. To explain the precautions that must be followed by the person handling or using it. So let's take a look at the requirements for labeling hazardous products that employers must follow.
Supplier labels within Canada must be written in English and French, and contain several key components. These are product identifiers, initial supplier, hazard pictograms where applicable, signal word, hazard statement, precautionary statement, and supplemental information, Here is an example of a WEMIS product label. Please take a moment to have a look at it. Then we'll go over each of the label components so you know where to find the key information you require as a worker.
The first component of the label is the product identifier. Which is the name of the chemical. It may also include other information like the batch number or code number. Please note the same product identifier needs to be on the safety data sheet as well.
The supplier identifier lists out the contact details of the Canadian manufacturer or importer or of the distributor. You or your employer need to contact them for further product information, you'll have access to their name, address, and phone number. We've gone over picigram extensively in the previous section of the training. Just to summarize, labels must contain the appropriate pictograms that represent the hazard or hazards contained within the product in question. If you don't see a pictogram on the label, remember this doesn't mean the product isn't toxic or hazardous. Look at the other elements of the label before using the products. Signal words are present on product labels as well as on the safety data sheet. Their purpose is to cue you about how severe the hazardous product you are working with is. WHEMIS only has two signal words, danger and warning. In the majority of cases, one of these words will be found on the product label. Danger is used for high risk hazards, while warning is used for less severe hazards. If no signal word is present on a label, this generally means the severity of the hazard is quite low.
Hazard statements appear below the signal words. And are bullet point like indicators of the particular hazards in the product according to the applicable hazard category. These short statements are written in words. For example, fatal if inhaled or contains flammable gas. When it comes to hazard statements, please note there may be several statements in this section as any hazard that applies to the product must be listed.
The next section of the label contains precautionary statements. There are five categories of precautionary statements. General statements, prevention statements to help you determine how to prevent negative exposure, statements to help you determine what to do if an incident occurs. Storage statements to let you know how to safely store a product, and disposal statements to help you dispose of hazardous chemicals safely. Some examples of hazard statements are keep container tightly closed, do not breathe fumes, get medical attention if this product gets in your eyes, Store product at room temperature. Do not place in direct sunlight, and dispose of materials in accordance with provincial regulations.
You may also note slashes or dots in the precautionary statements. Slashes are used to let the user know the types of protective equipment they should use, wear protective gloves for a other similar types of actions you should not take that may not be listed. For example, with the statement, do not subject to grinding, shock, friction, It would be up to the user to apply this knowledge to any other similar movements they should not make with the product.
Finally, if there is other product information that is required by law to pass along that hasn't been covered off in the label areas below, supplemental information will also be present on the label. The classification of the Another type of WMS label is the workplace label. Workplace labels are required when a hazardous product is produced made at the workplace and used in that workplace. A hazardous product is decanted, for example, transferred or poured, into another container, or a supplier label becomes lost or legible, unreadable. In any of these cases, is the responsibility of the workplace to create and attach the appropriate. Label to the hazardous product in question and to do so before it is handled, stored, or used by employees.
Just as with supplier labels, workplace labels must include product name, matching the SDS product name, safe handling precautions, may include pictograms or other supplier label information, and a reference to the SDS if available. If you are in charge of making workplace labels, please note that your province or territory may have additional labeling guidelines and you should check for any further requirements.
Okay. We've now covered off the different pieces of WEMIS labels. We just want to take a moment to go over the importance of reading them to your own safety. According to the Canadian Center for Occupational Health and Safety, all workers who are using a hazardous product should do the following. Always check to see if there is a label on the product before you use it. Read, understand, and follow the instructions on the label and SDS. Follow any additional education, instructions, and training as provided. By your employer. Ask your supervisor if you are not sure about how to use or store the product. For a new label when the old one cannot be seen or read properly. Do not use a product that is not labeled or if the label is unreadable. Ask your supervisor for help so they can replace the label.
We can now move on to discuss the last component of this WEMIS course, safety data sheets. Please note, safety data sheets, SDS. Been updated under WEMIS 2022 to provide more comprehensive information about hazardous products. The new format includes additional details as required by the latest amendments. Ensuring that all potential hazards and safety measures are clearly communicated.
In addition to the labels we just discussed, every product classified as a hazardous product by WIMIS must have a safety data sheet or SDS. Summary documents provide more detailed information about the hazardous product, than is on the label. SDS will communicate to you what the hazards of the product are, to use the product safely, what to expect if the recommendations are not followed, how to recognize symptoms of exposure, and and what to do if emergencies occur. Safety data sheets are made up of one standard format that contains 16 specific sections that must be presented by number. In order. As with the labels, the information on the SDSs in Canada needs to be provided in English and French.
Sections one to three of the SDS include information itself. Section one is called product identification. It includes information about, the product and supplier identifiers, recommended use, restrictions on use, and emergency phone numbers.
Section two is for hazard identification. It includes information about the hazard classification, label information such as the symbol, signal words and hazard statements, and other hazards that are not found elsewhere. Please note, section two, hazard identification, now includes new hazard statements for combustible dust products, such as may form combustible dust concentrations in air, or may form explosible dust air mixture.
Section three is called composition or information on ingredients. And we'll provide detailed information about what each product contains including. The chemical name of the material or substance, the names of any impurities, solvents, or additives, and the concentration amount of the chemical. Please note, this section has been amended to specify that all hazardous ingredients present in a mixture at concentration relevant cutoff levels must be disclosed regardless of their contribution to the mixtures hazard classification.
Sections four to eight of the SDS tell you about safety and preventative measures you can take. Beginning with section four. First eight measures. The first eight section depending on whether you've inhaled or ingested the material or been exposed through your eyes or skin. It also tells you the symptoms to watch for if you've been exposed and the immediate medical attention
Speaker 4

Today, 10:12 AM
to seek out.
Speaker 1

Today, 10:12 AM
Section five then outlines firefighting measure that should be taken in case a fire such as what will extinguish the fire in question as well as the hazards that will result from the chemical. Section six is for accidental release measures, meaning the precautions, protective equipment, emergency procedures that should be followed as well as how to contain or clean up the hazardous material.
Section seven and eight of the SDS all about protecting yourself with number seven, outlining any precautions that should be taken for safely handling and storing the material or substance and section eight discussing engineering controls and personal protective equipment.
Sections nine to 11 have to do with the chemicals or substances themselves. Section nine outlines the physical and chemical properties such as appearance, odor, and flammability. Section 10, stability and reactivity explains the properties of the chemical, and what conditions to avoid using it in, and section 11 goes over any toxicological information pertaining to the health effects that can be through exposures to the product. Please note, this section now includes a modification of information elements. Providing more detailed disclosures about the physical and chemical properties of hazardous products.
Sections 12 to 15 require the headings to be present, but under Canadian regulations, the supplier has the option to not provide information in these sections. The headings are section 12, ecological information, section 13, disposal considerations, section 14, transport information, and section 15, regulatory information. Finally, section 16, Other information tells you the last day the SDS was updated so you can determine whether or not you have relevant data or not.
Remember, your employer needs to ensure you know where to find safety data sheets for the product you use. They may provide this information to you on paper, such as in a binder, or they can provide it in electronic format, such as on a shared drive or Internet. If you aren't aware of where the SDSs are kept at your workplace, ask. Your employer must also make sure all labels and safety data sheets are up to date. If they are not, they need to request new ones from the supplier or make the labels or sheets themselves following the WIMS guidelines.
This concludes today's course on the Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System. We hope you've enjoyed this presentation and learned a lot about how to recognize hazardous chemicals you may be exposed to at work. Should now understand the general concepts and purpose behind the workplace hazardous materials information system as well as where to locate the information required to remain safe when working with toxic or hazardous chemicals. Becoming educated is the first step in staying safe. So thanks for joining in. Taking action is the second step. You should now understand the required actions you should be taking to fulfill your requirements under women's. Such as familiarizing yourself with the labels, SDS sheets, and utilizing this information to keep yourself and others safe when handling, storing, or using dangerous chemicals. We must all work together to keep our workplaces safe.
The final piece of this training is to take a short quiz to test your knowledge about what you have learned here today. Upon completion of this quiz, you will be able to download a certificate to show that your WYMISS training is complete and up to date. Thank you again for participating in this training module. Please apply your knowledge to stay safe and healthy at work.
